---

title: Cross Country 2018
date: 2018-10-17 00:00 UTC
tags: Citation

---

# 2018 Cross Country Citation Article

## by Jack MapelLentz '22

Thanks to the incredible efforts of both the players and coaches - including Mr. Tony Kinzley, Chief Kimberly Freide, Mr. Andrew Hayden, plus Mrs. Anne McQuillan, the iconically kind Middle School coach - STA’s cross-country team has had an equally incredible season thus far. Despite the departure of Ryan Tracy (last year’s top runner), the varsity runners preformed exceptionally well, even against significantly larger schools, and the junior varsity is stronger than it’s been in years.

A new training plan was implemented this year by coach Tony Kinzley, and it’s already showing its effects. “I think the new training plan is awesome,” said senior Luke Kolar, the team’s fastest runner, “I can already see improvements at all skill levels for runners this year. Also, I'm sure the team will see long-term benefits for younger runners who are starting on this plan.”

After the inaugural three weeks of the training plan, the competition kicked off on August 31st in Rosemount at the Irish Invitational (a two-mile race), a course that just so happened to be situated next to an active construction site. It was followed a week later by the Fairbault Invitational, a longer five-kilometer course. In Fairbault, Luke Kolar and Thomas Thurlow both received awards for finishing in ninth and eighteenth place, respectively. Overall, the both the varsity and junior varsity teams led a strong showing against schools with a significantly larger student body, especially that early in the season.

Following two more weeks of training (including the rather notorious VO2max intervals), on September 22nd, the team boarded a bus bound for Milaca, ready to compete in the eponymous Mega-Meet. The Cadets hadn’t made an appearance in three years, having last competed in 2015. An hour and a half later, they pulled into a rural street packed to the brim with buses: the Milaca Mega-Meet is one of the largest in the entire country, with over 160 teams competing. After walking the mile from the bus’s parking spot to the entrance, they navigated the sea of tents and began warming up. It wasn’t expected to be a “PR course” - that is, a course in which one sets their personal record time - but conditions turned out to be near-perfect, and every single runner raced their season PR.

How did they run such wonderful races? A special emphasis on control: “The key to a successful race is to go out at a steady pace. A runner needs to be consistent, and that means saving energy to run even splits for the second and third miles. It's hard to master this skill, and some runners never do,” according to Luke Kolar.

Later, the following Friday, the top ten varsity runners visited the University of Minnesota for a scouting practice of sorts. They returned the next day to experience (and race in) the Roy Griak Invitational, a meet in which incredibly fast college athletes compete - and a tough, hilly course. That night, they reconvened at Noodles & Company to continue a tradition from past years.

On October 6th, the team made the two-and-a-half hour trip up I-94 to Alexandria, making a pit stop at St. John’s along the way (though a logistical hiccup meant that the seniors didn’t receive their beloved Johnnie Bread). Though they had to endure some, well, *questionable* movie choices (you can thank Kevin Murphy for that), they eventually arrived at the Arrowhead Resort ready to race. Conditions were once again good, though the course was a bit sloppy, and in the end, the team once again held its own in a competitive race.



Looking forward to the future, the sections meet is only a couple short weeks away, and the team is optimistic. “I’m hoping that our team will win conference and perform well in Sections. Don't want to 'count any chickens before they hatch,' but I predict our team will see success in the coming weeks.”

It might be hard for someone who’s never participated in cross-country to fathom why all these crazy people would run their hearts out, but it’s human connections that make the sport worthwhile. “The best part of cross-country is the people. Whether it be coaches or people, running is actually a great sport for getting to know people - and the people I've met I couldn't be more grateful for,” said Luke. It is these people that make each and every day an unforgettable, unique experience… and this season, so far, has been filled to the brim with them.
