---

title: Selecting the Cadet Colonel
date: 2020-01-15 00:00
tags: Citation
published: false

---

## *or: A Recent History of the Selection Process*

## by Jack MapelLentz '22

Everyone has that moment of realization — *who’s that person who stands in front at Formation? Why does everyone look up to them?* And then you find that they’re the Cadet Colonel, leader of the entire student body. One question lingers within the recesses of the minds of many, though: how exactly is the Cadet Colonel chosen? I counted myself among that group for over three years, acutely curious about the process’s inner workings but never quite sure how to uncover them. This year, though, I turned to those within the selection process in an effort to understand it.

The ceremony’s modern formality is quite recent, said Lieutenant Colonel DePuglio. “Additionally, it has developed into an event broadcast by Cadet TV and a mini-reunion with the recent graduates coming back from college. It is an awesome day… a celebration of STA!”

Before delving into the inner workings and details of just how this marvelous celebration comes together, let’s first establish what the position consists of. “The Cadet Colonel is essentially responsible for everything that happens, or fails to happen, within the Corps of Cadets,” said Colonel Hetherington, our Commandant of Cadets of two years. “He sets the tone, the priorities, and the vision for the remainder of the school year.“ At the same time, he ensures that the Corps accomplishes its mission — developing boys into men of character — and fosters the school’s four core values of faith, integrity, respect, and excellence. Getting into the nitty-gritty, when Colonel Hetherington says that everything is the Cadet Colonel’s responsibility, he means *everything*. Colonel DePuglio named a few of many duties: “Leadership, motivation, training, Cadet performance, drill, completion of events, dances, discipline, demerit management, counseling, uniform wear, assemblies, upholding of school standards, planning, inspections, reviews, traditions, and mentorship of younger Cadets” — and that’s not anywhere near a comprehensive list.

Selecting a Cadet to fill the role is an elaborate journey. “The process may actually start as far back as the freshman year with everything a Cadet is involved in, including, of course, grades and pursuing excellence in all he does inside and outside of school,” said Colonel Hetherington. The formal process, though, begins one’s junior year, when the gears of the Junior Officer process start turning in January. The seniors of that year choose the junior class’s “Top 20” — the entire JO process is, in fact, run by seniors. From there, those twenty Cadets partake in Super Sunday; though it sounds like a sporting event, it’s a spring day jam-packed with interviews and testing. At the end of the day, the field is narrowed to the “Top 14,” who are placed in some of the brigade’s top leadership positions, which they assume for the remainder of the schoolyear.

Once summer passes, the school ushers in its newly-seniors, and the Cadet Colonel selection process picks up right where it left off. We all know that final promotions take place the Wednesday prior to Thanksgiving, but it wasn’t always that way. “Before 1943, selection and promotion was conducted before school started in August,” wrote Colonel DePuglio. “The ceremony after 1943 was conducted around Thanksgiving — because that's when Captain Fleming's family received the Medal of Honor from President Roosevelt.“

Selection is handled by the aptly named Cadet Colonel Selection Board, which is comprised of the school’s Headmaster, who is a non-voting member and tiebreaker; the Upper School Director; the Director of Academic Life; the Dean of Students; the Commandant of Cadets; a student representative, who polls the students and represents their voice; and likewise, a faculty representative who does the same. Every voting board member has the same voice; no position has precedence over another when voting. Each competing Cadet is discussed thoroughly… but what exactly does the board look at?

I was curious as to what traits made one worthy of becoming Cadet Colonel, so I asked what set any one contender apart from the rest. Colonel DePuglio mentioned some key personality attributes: they must be “humble, approachable, [have a] great sense of humor, love tradition, be respected and trusted by his peers as a man of his word, not be afraid to correct a Cadet if he is doing something wrong, a gentleman, passionate of all STA sports and co-curriculars (even the ones he does not participate in), have strong faith and values, help anyone, love the school, be positive all of the time, never quit, and always help others before himself.” Ms. Jaworski, the former faculty representative for six years, underscored the respect factor. “The similarities I have noticed among Cadet Colonels have to do with how other students regard them. While academics is one important factor, it is not the only one to consider. One of the questions discussed is "will the student body follow him?" However, just because a student is popular does not mean they are going to be Cadet Colonel.” As for what the Board itself looks at, Colonel Hetherington wrote that it “considers a variety of input to include academic excellence, extracurriculars, awards and achievements. The board selection is intended to be as objective as possible; however, we do take into account the "whole person" approach when determining who is best qualified for the position.” That holistic approach was emphasized by Ms. Jaworski as well — though academics are an essential facet, she said, it’s imperative that they’ve preformed well in their military leadership classes, and, most importantly, have the respect of both the faculty and students. In addition to all of this, to increase objectivity in the process, last year Colonel Hetherington implemented a system that utilizes a spreadsheet with all the collected data on the top Cadets.

Once they’ve taken everything into account, the board finally issues its final vote, selecting the Cadet Colonel. From there, it’s up to the Commandant as to how to appoint the other five Cadets (this isn’t under the purview of the Board). The newly-appointed Cadet Colonel goes on to lead the brigade for the first time, assuming the position for not only for the remainder of their time at STA, but for well beyond graduation. According to Colonel DePuglio, “The Cadet Colonel must lead and advise in all aspects of school life…after graduation, he is the defacto class leader — keeping the class informed, and planning and organizing class events.”

This whole process leaves us with some key points: first of all, and above all else, one must earn the respect of their class and the student body as a whole. Without that, the purpose of the position falls apart. Respect amongst the faculty and staff, too, is extremely important. It’s imperative that you aren’t dishonest — cheating is basically intolerable, and one must be worthy of trust. Secondly, diversified involvement is extremely important as well; all of the people with whom I spoke mentioned it. Being involved in not only athletics but also plenty of extracurriculars is a huge plus. Excelling at academics is very important, as well, though it’s not the be-all-end-all of the process that some may think it to be.

If one thing can sum all of the endless intricacies and facets of what ultimately distinguishes a Cadet Colonel, I think it’s this: they care about our school from the bottom of their heart; seeing it suffer any sort of difficulty would be like watching their own home falter. Because STA really is their home, from the building to the incredible people to the intangible brotherhood and everything in between. The position of Cadet Colonel represents something we all hope to be, deep down: someone who can be the ultimate leader and brother. If we all follow that ideal, we’re capable of things we could never have imagined. And it’s thanks to this time-perfected, ever-evolving process that we have some exceptional people to look up to.
