---

title: who are
date: 2020-09-20 06:54 UTC
tags: draft
layout: florencelayout

---

# who are

everything is there; it happens, but then it’s over, gone. i swear i’m not quite the mess i seem, but in reality it’s much worse. why do things always end and then disappear? why am i never really here? it all flies by, and it’s comfortable, but i hate it. it’s all just loops and loops and loops. i wonder if anyone else has the same thing. probably, but it’s more romantic to be lonely in it. but it’s also more sinking into the ground, or something; i guess i can’t think of the right word. it’s all bursting at the seams. i want to run away to a cabin somewhere in the middle of nowhere and never come back so badly, but i want to keep quiet and not cause a commotion, though i guess that accomplishes both things. i wish i could realize how i was alive all the time and not just when i’m driving past the farms staring at the sky. it doesn’t matter what i wish, which isn’t supposed to be some self-indulgent thing or something; i’m saying it as a fact. why do i always have a song stuck in my head? is that normal? i wonder what *is* normal. my height, i guess? tomorrow i will wake up and do homework all day, because everyone says i should, and then i’ll go to school for five days on my computer, which is so much better than it is in real life but still the workload is crippling, but that’s self-indulgent and i’m thankful to have the opportunity so much but it’s also true, and then i’ll have a day off looking out the window wondering about everything and then i’ll do more homework. i so badly want to fall in love. i’d say need, but i probably don’t really need anything, except then maybe that now that i think about it. and my family. i’m perfect on the outside, normal beneath that, and completely broken on the inside. i think i’ll go insane soon, if i haven’t already, or moreso than i already am, but i’ve been saying that for a while and here i am. i remember when i remembered why i am still alive and living exists, and it was marvelous. but i just want to drive out in the middle of nowhere with my girlfriend who doesn’t exist, or i guess theoretically does somewhere, but i don’t know. i think that would make me whole. or at least falling asleep next to her. why would you kiss someone without loving them? it’s all so confusing. i really really hope i fall in love soon.

everything is—
