---

title: the boxer
date: 2020-06-22 01:17 UTC
tags: draft
layout: florencelayout

---

# the boxer

The light is in the window, brushing her skin, warming the almost-there blanket air, warming her too. Sleep is waving goodbye, but  she’s holding it tightly just a bit longer, and in the embrace, she begins to remember —

it was something just as warm, a little less pure, but a little more whole, and the slightest bit tighter, like tucking the blankets underneath you a little more when the rain hits the roof even harder. she holds them even closer, holding someone, who was it?

days, weeks, months, years, but it is only hours, only minutes, seconds slipping between her fingers when she realizes she feels the cold seeping in — she loves the cold, but this is something different, some heartless piercing —

*”to make it clear, we are NOT dating”*

; and she remembers more —
*Then why did you invite me over every two days? why did I talk with you constantly? FaceTime you at three a.m.? give you presents; loan my books? Why’d you do it all too? why’d you never make it clear?*

She breathes.

*Sometimes, you know, I’d wondered what it’d be like if you’d liked me, and I wished over and over again, silently crying in the corner of the laundry room on the clothes behind the dryer, just wondering about our endless numbered days…*

*and sometimes I wonder what would’ve happened if I hadn’t wasted my time (was it wasted though?), and if I’d never liked you, and nothing had ever happened — none of the runs, none of the Netflix, none of the wandering through Canada wishing I was with you…*

There’s a radio in her head — Simon and Garfunkel, but the Jerry Douglas version. Her eyes are open, looking out, but where? Out, they say.

*But mostly now I wonder if you’ll ever be happy with yourself. And I still wish that I knew the answer.*

and she is rolling out of bed, and Marcus Mumford is singing,
*In his anger and his shame, I am leaving, I am leaving;*

She’s already walking down the front steps.

*but the fighter still remains*
